as this conflict intensifies by the day
some are asking China to use its
Regional influence to help deescalate
you might remember Beijing brokered a
normalization agreement between Iran and
Saudi Arabia earlier this year it also
enjoys warm relations with Iran a
country that backs Hamas the terrorist
group that launched the recent attack
against Israel now China has declared
its neutrality in the matter but has
failed to condemn Hamas as the aggressor
and accused Israel's response of being
excessive still China says it intends to
send a peace Envoy to the
region to advance for two-state solution
peace talks should resume as soon as
possible all kinds of mechanisms to
promote talks should play a role in this
regard a special Chinese Envoy will
visit the region to attempt to reach a
ceasefire and en the bombing and to
deescalate the
situation obviously lots of interests at
play here and about those we can now
speak to valina chakarova she's a
geopolitical strategist and consultant
based in Vienna Miss chakarova welcome
to the day now tell me how could the
conflict in the Middle East affect the
global balance of
power well first and foremost we need to
understand that uh we are already in a
cold war 2.0 scenario uh in terms of the
global context that is a competition
between the United States on the one
hand and China and Russia on the other
and now we have a second front where
this competition is being manifested
given the fact that uh similar uh
development has occurred uh in Eastern
Europe when Russia launched the war
against Ukraine namely now we are
observing similar Behavior by China also
in the Middle East where another
convergence of interests between Russia
and China has um logically emerged as
expected mhm how is Beijing using the
situation to its Advantage at this
point well as it was pointed out in fact
China was pursuing a normalization of
relations between uh on the one hand
Israel and the Arab world on the other
namely as it was also highlighted uh the
Chinese broker deal between Saudi Arabia
and Iran this was a very big diplomatic
highlight and China was also implying uh
the the ambition to brocker a deal
between Israel and uh Palestine so in
fact the plans are now put on hold as
we've seen also with the American plans
uh towards normalization between Israel
and Saudi Arabia so here now China is
pursuing its old let's say uh more
traditional approach uh regarding the
region namely that China has been in
fact um well in support of of two-state
solution and has been supportive also of
the Palestinian Coast that goes back to
the time of the Cold War similar also to
what Russia is doing this is of course a
hugely complex um conflict do you think
we'll see china hit a wall when it comes
to its Ambitions to to expand its reach
in the Middle East
here well let's not forget that China is
already client number one when it comes
to a lot of commodities coming out from
the region so uh the Arab countries were
in fact uh strongly interested in
intensifying the relationship with China
given the fact that China is also the
largest exporter of Commodities in the
world so in a sense China cannot stand
neutral uh even though that it is once
again uh following the same approach as
it did in Eastern Europe with Russia war
against Ukraine sending an Envoy um more
or less
announcing a neutrality no China is not
neutral on this conflict uh same as with
the other and let's not forget that we
have a third front which is of course uh
Taiwan so it is a multi front
competition and here once again China
will have to uh position itself so
clearly what we expect is that it will
position itself together with Russia in
a more convergence way uh as opposite to
uh United States which is clearly
supporting Israel let's look at Russia
because they're seeking more immediate
gains How likely do you think this
conflict is to draw attention and
resources of course as well away from
Ukraine well this is goal number one as
seen from Russia's perspective the very
fact that now there is a risk of an
immediate War uh that is the ground
offensive that Israel is planning to
conduct in the Gaza Strip is good news
from Russia's perspective Ive why
because the international attention will
be drawn to another region and Russia of
course will be more or less uh
continuing its War of Attrition against
Ukraine that is uh goal number one goal
number two of course is not to have a
war with all the spillover effects in
the region but at least ongoing military
tensions this is why Russia has now uh
actually declared that it wants to
position itself as a mediator
while having all these conversations
with key players in the region such as
Egypt Iran uh even the Palestinian uh
Authority so in a sense this is a
typical behavior of Russia to take um
all the sides to position itself between
all the sides to support all the sides
while actually making sure that the as I
said military tensions continue and this
is also uh positive from Russian point
of view because uh United States will
have to get involved uh on the side of
Israel Israel is strategic partner among
the most important strategic partners of
uh the United States and that also means
in the long run that Ukraine May face a
situation where the Americans will no
longer provide military aid another of
course good news from Russian
perspective so all in all it means that
Russia will actually support the two
states solution will actually go against
military uh intervention so ground
offensive but we'll also try to position
itself uh in between we'll have to leave
it there geopolitical strategist Vina
chakarova thank you so much for your
input thank you very
much